I'm Wesley Morris and this is
Cannonball. Today we're going from the
highest to the lowest.
[Music]
I never think of Spike Lee as a summer
movie filmmaker,
but I'm an idiot because I'm sitting
here and it's occurring to me that this
is a summer movie man. It's been true
more or less for 40 years. A lot of his
movies have come out in the summer. I
was there. I saw them. His masterpiece
obviously Do the right thing.
>> You the man. No, you the man. No, you
the man.
>> But also my Better Blues,
>> Jungle Fever.
>> She's white.
>> White.
>> One of my favorite spikely movies is
called Summer of Sam.
>> And it actually came out in the summer
of 1999. Black Clansmen summer movie.
And now we've got highest to lowest
highest two lowest. It hit theaters last
week and will start streaming on Apple
TV Plus September 5th. Okay, this movie
feels like right now to me.
>> I know what that means to have nothing
and want everything.
>> I should warn you before we go any
further. There's no way to talk about
how right now it is without laying out
the whole plot, which is ridiculous. But
in order for you to understand how
ridiculous this movie is, you got to lay
out the entire thing. So, it's kind of
what I'm going to have to do, but trust
me, just it'll be worth it. The movie is
loosely a remake of an Akira Corasawa
suspense thriller classic, High and Low,
which came out in 1963 that was based on
an Ed McBain novel called King's Ransom.
In this movie, Highest to Lowest, bring
Spike Lee back together again with
Denzel Washington. I think this is
number five for them. Denzel plays David
King, record executive, who's got to
decide whether to spend all of his
capital to stop his label from being
eaten by some bigger fish, or pay the
ransom to the dude who kidnapped the son
of his right-hand man, who's played by
Jeffrey Wright. You are not going to
believe who the kidnapper turns out to
be. We're going to spoil that, too. Like
all spikely joints, this one's doing the
most. It's deeply New York, but it's
also seriously thinking about what black
people at the top, oh, black people at
the bottom. I watched this movie and I
thought, you know, who's probably got a
lot of feelings about first how New York
it is and then about the politics of its
blackness.
>> Vincent Cunningham.
>> My god, what a hairline.
>> Vince is one of our finest critics of
theater, sports, television, TV ads, of
life. As of last year, he's also a
novelist of Great Expectations. That's
the title of the book, and it's out. You
should get it. He's also the co-host of
the podcast Critics at Large, a New
Yorker joint where Vincent's also a
staff writer.
>> Vincent,
>> hey,
>> welcome to Cannonball.
>> Thank you for that.
>> Um, I don't know. I was sitting there
and I was like, I people I could talk to
about this, but I want to know what
Vincent thinks. I mean, how did this
movie make you feel? And where would you
situate it in your your Spikely movie
feelings?
First of all, it made me feel rare joy.
Classic Spike Lee. Too much is
happening.
>> Too much.
>> And so, it's just a great place to think
about Spike Lee, but also to enjoy
another late stage. Great Denzel
Washington.
>> How does this man do it? Okay, so I just
want to set this up a little bit,
>> please.
>> Uh, the opening shot of this thing is a
panoramic.
I don't know, either copter shot or
drone shot. It's 2025. Why Why pay the
money for a chopper when you can get a
drone?
>> Um, but it's very well done.
>> Yes.
>> This where the camera is coming from one
end of Brooklyn to another end. You're
winding up in Dumbo.
>> Yeah.
>> Which is the place where all the
tourists go to take the pictures between
the Manhattan Bridge and the Brooklyn
Bridge on the ground. But Denzel
Washington's character Yeah. David King
lives with his wife and son in this new
building, 30 Front Street,
>> which is basically a bunch I don't even
how would we describe this?
>> It's a Jenga tower of balconies.
>> It is basically a bunch of balconies
just dropped on top of each other. Um,
that's a great description.
>> And the camera just sort of zooms right
on into the top floor where Denzel
lives. He is highest at this moment. And
another thing about this scene is,
again, this is spikely maximalism. As
you're getting this panorama of the city
and of the newly glittery Brooklyn, it's
going, "Oh, what a beautiful morning."
It's like
>> Norm Lewis.
>> It's ridiculous.
>> The Norm Lewis is singing like the
opening number from Oklahoma.
>> It's like if you want to know that this
guy has a good life, there are many
different ways to find that out. You can
hear it. You can see it. If you could
smell it, Spike Lee would would make you
smell it. Every sense is employed in
just just to tell you this is a guy on
literally and figuratively on top of the
world.
>> Yes, Denzel looks great.
>> He does.
>> Um
>> sort of the point of the movie
>> is that he looks great.
>> He has been Beijing within an inch of
his life.
>> I've never seen Denzel I've seen him do
everything. I've never seen him have
this much hairline.
>> Yes.
>> My god, what a hairline.
>> And and it is ebony. I
as black as night.
>> I mean, you could It's the It's the It's
the waves from Moonlight, right? The
waves from the end of Moonlight are on
his head, right? And they are they are
so black. They are blue.
>> And the hairline was made with a
protractor. Can I talk about a right
angle?
>> LeBron James is studying this hairline.
I'm telling you.
>> Whoever did it, shout out to you. The
magic of cinema.
>> But basically, we are watching a man. We
are we are meant to take in the the
scope of the apartment
>> um which is you it's enormous and we're
meant to sort of savor the art direction
>> the the fruit bowls the the Bosat on the
wall um
>> and Kahende Wy and every other black
painter
>> I mean there's a giant portrait of Tony
Morrison I don't know I mean
parathetically could you live in this
apartment
>> I mean you could pro Okay.
>> I can't live on a first of all, any
place that has a balcony that high too
too much. If it's going to be that high,
I can't have a balcony.
>> Fair. Fair.
>> I can't live like that.
>> But it's also worth getting into the
idea that this is, as I said, it's based
on an owner Cororus movie um taken from
an epic bane novel. Did you see have you
seen the Corsaw movie? I had seen it in
college and I watched it again almost
directly after seeing highest to lowest
because I I too wanted to see kind of
what are the similarities but also what
are the differing priorities.
>> I also watched it again. I hadn't seen
that movie since I was in college and we
should just set up
>> yes
>> exactly what the Akira Corsau movie and
the Spikeley movie have in common.
They're basically both about two
businessmen who are about to make a big
expensive business deal who realize that
their son is kidnapped except oops, it's
the son actually of their employee,
right?
>> And they're both at moments of maximum
financial
sort of procarity. they they've
leveraged all their money to make to try
to like do a corporate maneuver and
paying the ransom for this kid who is it
turns out not theirs uh will require
them to put all of this corporate
maneuvering in jeopardy. So it becomes
kind of a morality play in both cases.
>> What do I do? Do I make this deal or do
I make this other deal to get this kid
back?
>> Yeah. In the Corsawa movie, we're
talking about like a guy who works for a
big shoe company and he runs one of the
big factories that makes the shoes. He
wants to take over the entire company.
Denzel is the record executive. Wait,
who do you think Denzel is here?
>> Well, unfortunately, he's sort of,
right? I mean, he's
>> Sean Combmes and Barry Gordy,
>> right? He's Well, he's Puffy. Is he
Clarence Avant?
>> I mean, I mean, there's just so many. Is
he LA Reed? I mean, he's not quite LA
Reed, but I mean, he's like a composite,
but the puffiness, I think that Puffy is
the person who stands out as being the
most likely culprit,
>> part of the music, but also on the
production side and also the business
genius, hitting all of the sort of zones
of production. You know, he's made his
fortune by building this company. And
the question is, does he sell it out or
does he, you know, take it under his own
control truly and bring it back to its
roots,
>> right? The structure of the two movies
are the same. They decide, you know, the
protagonist decides that he is going to
pay the ransom,
>> do the right thing.
>> Yes.
>> Haha. Yes. In the Corasawa film, Mifone
basically like you could just written on
his face the anguish of the decision.
And then one day he just comes out and
says, "I have decided I will pay the
ransom." Blah blah blah.
>> I'm a good Japanese man. I know what to
do.
>> There you go. Denzel can't do this. He
has to go through the dark knight of the
soul. Does he want to buy his record
label back from being merged with some
much larger conglomeration?
>> Yeah.
>> Or is he going to use all that money?
Basically, we're told all the money he
has, all the capital he has, right?
>> Like he's going to mortgage that
apartment and
use whatever savings they have to to do
this
>> to to buy the the record company that is
there's already been a sale made. The
ink is almost dry. They're going to sell
the record company to some, it sounds
like larger conglomerate. Yeah. And he
wants to actually take it over so he can
get back to basics and like again be a
make authentic real music. Real music.
>> Even though he's the rich guy, his
aesthetics at least to himself are I
want to get back to the to the root of
you know you know where whatever the
soul is that black music comes from. I
want to reclaim that. That is a great
way to set up what I think is the second
wildest scene in the movie.
Maybe the third wildest.
>> I mean, there's so many wild scenes.
>> Denzel is is performing the the this the
struggle over whether or not
>> to to pay this ransom.
>> That's right.
>> He's sitting in his office.
>> That's right. and he's just like looking
around at the photographs.
>> There are photographs,
one of which is of a young Denzel
Washington, which has been sort of put
on the cover of I'm pretty sure Rolling
Stone magazine.
>> Did that really Wow,
>> that was crazy.
>> Oh my god. Talk about what you you
forget cuz it's looking good right now,
but you get reminded of what 1989
Denzel looked like. smoldering
>> that era of Denzel. So anyway, there's a
there's a mocked up Rolling Stone
>> and and he's looking around at these
photographs of basically heroes of the
black past and he's looking around
making outward like audible to us
appeals to like Artha, what would you
do? Whoever you know
>> and there's you know classic Spike Lee
when someone is addressed you get a
fullon closeup of the thing of the
object person whatever doesn't matter
what it is he is going to give you a
beautiful closeup of it.
>> That's right. and a photograph of his
his former self. And this is where the
movie
>> he makes the two of them talk to each
other.
>> That's right. And so it is really an
appeal to the you mentioned the sort of
joint filmography of both of these men.
You can't miss that Denzel slams the
desk at one point just like Denzel as
Malcolm X once did.
>> He gives you that stutter that stutter
uh edit where he does it once and then
he immediately does it again.
>> That's right. Yeah. It's it's so it's
it's an appeal to
um what I think is the similarity if you
want to read this film
autobiographically.
>> Interesting.
>> Um David King might also be a standin
for Spike Lee in that. Okay. Who's more
on top of the who goes to every Knicks
game? The Knicks just went to the
Eastern Conference Finals of the in the
NBA playoffs and Spike's there at at
courtside. Nobody's got a better life.
did miss one important game cuz he was
doing this movie in can. He was like
pitching this movie in can. But
>> but so like and Spike Lee comes from a
black, you know, certainly artistic
millu. His father's a jazz musician, but
a middle class millu and
>> in Fort Green, Brooklyn
>> in Fort Green, Brooklyn and is now the
kind of guy who's either on the
sidelines at Madison Square Garden or in
Martha's Vineyard. Right. And I do think
this movie is about what does he owe
>> um to black people broadly, but to the
black masses perhaps particularly. It's
like everything that I've done, these
representations that I've helped bring
into being, including Denzel Washington
as Malcolm X, right? Um what does it
mean? What what does it add up to in
terms of my debt? Have I paid it
>> by the spectacle of my own success? Or
is there something more that I owe? And
you see David King going through this,
snapping his head, smacking the desk,
talking to himself, and he can't make
the right decision until he has had this
discourse with like the black host of
witnesses that have preceded him.
>> James, what should I do? Closeup of
James Brown.
>> That's right.
>> Stevie, what do I do? Close up of Stevie
Wonder. Artha, talk to me.
>> Talk to me.
>> What should I do? And then it just I I
mean for shits and giggles, Jimmy, tell
me what should my black soul do? And you
get a shot of Jimmyi Hendricks.
>> Yeah,
>> it is extraordinarily excessive. And I
love that you were connecting this to
Spike Spike Lee and his
idea of himself and these questions
about what he's achieved at this point
because we like this is a kind of legacy
question. Mhm.
>> And I just we should say that the camera
for this scene is like up in the
ceiling.
>> Yeah.
>> These are not close-ups of Denzel. We're
kind of like surveilling
>> um this moment. This is a private moment
that we might not be meant to see.
>> Yeah. This is the CCTV feed of of the
office here,
>> right? And um I just really like the the
distance from which it is happening. It
is it is almost like God watching. Um
but also, you know, an audience bearing
witness to the to the to the inner
struggles of an elite black man.
>> Um which are of course interrupted by
the police. And when he comes in, he has
a total masculinity moment where he's
just like, "Yeah, I was um
>> yeah,
>> I don't know. It's just like summer
cold. Summer cold. What you going to do?
Summer cold."
>> Meanwhile, he's weeping to his or
whatever. like just crying for our
people to his people. Um I I really
think this moment I wish we could have
watched it together.
>> I laughed so much.
>> I was howling. Yeah.
>> It's ridiculous.
>> Yeah.
>> But it is also kind of it is moving in
that
you understand what it is meant to you
meant you understand the work it is
meant to do.
>> Yeah. It really sets up the rest of the
movie in this beautiful way. It's it's
not incidental. It's so important that
he's making these appeals to Jimmyi
Hendris, to uh James Brown. Um
his notion of black authenticity, his
notions of where the soul of the people
is kind of kept um is different from
later on we're going to get into like
the world of hip-hop, right? And
>> somehow this has huge stakes. I think
this is what you've identified is like a
classic spikely tension
>> that has really really really really
come to sit at the soul of this movie.
>> Yeah.
>> And I mean the Jeffrey Wright character
is there as a signifier of some kind of
reminder to the Denzel Washington
character of where he's come from.
>> Jeffrey Wright character is going to
prison.
>> Yes. We don't know why.
>> We don't know. I mean, there's a world
in which I mean, nobody said this,
>> but like was it for Denzel? Do you know
what I like who like this is a this is a
guy who is he's a practicing Muslim
>> also a devoted friend
>> and he is experiencing
this friend of his um this person he's
devoted a lot of his time and life to
struggle about whether or not to like do
him like in some ways an ultimate favor,
>> right? Um, but then the other nugget of
the tension here is between Denzel
Washington's character, the record
executive and the kidnapper.
>> Yes.
>> Who we don't know. Did you think for a
little while that it was Jeffrey Wright?
Did he Did Jeffrey Wright was involved
in the kidnapping?
>> Unfortunately, I didn't know the cast of
this movie. So, I I knew who at least
the main kidnapper was. You didn't know
that that was going to be him?
>> I didn't know. I didn't know anything.
>> It turns out, of course, that he is not
the kidnapper. And I think we can
continue to prolong the the
>> No, let me
I I want to talk about the scene because
I I will set it up to just say we know
at about like an hour in we know we know
a lot of things. We know that it's
Jeffrey Wright's son, not not Trey,
Denzel Washington's son, who comes back
home and is like, "Dad,
>> you know, you claim to be of the people,
but you you're not going to help get
Kyle out away from these kidnappers.
This is insane. You you
>> I mean, Denzel Washington gets called
kinds of like [__] ass n-word, [__]
ass nword. I've never heard anybody
>> Yeah. Even the KKK talked to Denzo
Washington as bad as the black people in
this movie.
>> It's true.
>> But you need that. There is like a sort
of racial shaming. It's like I'm I've
looked up to you. So what you going to
do?
>> I will yada yada yada us to the to the
to a moment where Denzel has done this
transfer. There is still 45 minutes left
to go in this movie. Jeffrey Wright gets
his son back. The son is recovering in
the hospital and the police are shaking
him down. Yeah. Like, do you remember
anything? Do you know anything? Do you
Does anything stand out? Does there's
like And the sun is like, "Oh,
oh my god. I don't I don't know.
I feel like
I don't I don't I mean, I think there
was like Oh, man. I think there's just
there was like there was this song and I
heard it. I don't know. And I can still
I can still kind of remember it was like
back
[Music]
back to the trunk from the trunk from
the trunk to the back.
>> Yeah.
>> I I think that's I think that's what it
I think that's what it was. I can
remember. I can still hear it.
>> Yeah. It was like don't don't.
>> So Denzel is like out one day listening
to a playlist that his son made.
Finally.
>> Finally.
>> Parthetically, his son has been pushing
on him all these artists all this time.
>> Mhm.
>> Like, "Dad, you should look at this
person."
>> With the insistence that only an
entitled Nepo baby could have.
>> He's like, "I got the next big thing for
you, Dad." And he wants them to take him
seriously.
>> Yes. And one of the songs on the
playlist
>> he can wait what
>> I mean back to the front.
>> What blasts in to poor Kyle's hospital
room and is like is this it?
>> Is this the song?
>> Is this the song? And Kyle's like oh
yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> That that's it.
>> Yeah. I just want to I want to prolong
the suspense in the world of this of
this conversation just to say that
Denzel Washington because the cops are
like they are they are not taking his
clue seriously.
>> So Denzel and Jeffrey just hook up and
they're like you know what we got this
>> we can we can go find this kidnapper.
Let's go get him.
>> Yeah.
>> And it really is one of the most
exciting things that happens in this
movie. Like the idea that Jeffrey Wright
and Denzel
are just gonna
>> be vigilantes. Yeah.
>> They they go off on this on this
redemption ride
>> to what song? Do you remember what they
would spike with what the needle drop on
that trip is?
>> The big payback.
>> I mean,
>> and they are just jamming.
>> They're like Denzel is shadow boxing in
the car like Jeffrey Wright. Sheffy
right takes out a gun and he's like,
>> "What is that?"
>> Insurance. That's Jake from State Farm.
They're just They're making jokes. They
are It's It's actually insane.
And it's And they're dead ass serious.
They're going to They're going to get
this money back by themselves.
>> Uh
it is.
I Spikeley,
I don't we don't have a word for what
this is. I mean, I guess we don't really
have a word for what black too muchness
is.
>> I mean, we have all kinds of words,
right? Like extra, too much, went too
far, did the I mean, but
>> I really want I mean, cuz camp isn't
quite it. Like black camp doesn't
satisfy me.
>> No, it's more than that.
>> It's more than that. Where like in the
world of a black work of art or culture,
>> Mhm.
>> you are getting like so much more than
you need. It's camp adjacent, but it's
it's it's black.
>> What I kept thinking about was like it's
like it's almost classically
expressionistic. Yes. It's trying to put
emotional states in their full vivid
color,
>> but it's also like in this scene, it's
like two boys. It's just like such a Do
you understand how high the stakes are
right now?
>> It's a
>> one of y'all could die if not both of
you cuz y'all are going to boogie down
to to to what? Like show pieces to each
other.
>> To what is the question? They don't ever
say we're going to kill this
[__] I'm going to I'm going to
show him this gun and he's going to get
>> What is the shadow boxing really going
to accomplish?
>> They just they just want a
confrontation.
>> It's incredible. But I think it's such
an amazing moment because it's not just
that Denzel and Jeffrey Wright like pull
up to this Bronx studio where the
kidnapper is currently recording at 2:00
a.m. after stopping by the the the
kidnapper's girlfriend's house where
she's like, "Oh, he loves you so much.
He named our son. I let him name our son
David or king after you.
>> Yeah,
>> he loves you. She has no idea, by the
way, what's going on.
>> He keeps talking about how one day he's
going to meet you and y'all are going to
make music together and that's going to
be that
>> dreams are going to come true. And
Denzel gets in the studio. He sits at
the control board. Now remember this is
a worldass
you know billiondollar producer at this
point like dreams of hits and we can see
in the studio at the microphone is none
other than Vincent just saying
>> it's ASAP Rocky.
It's ASAP Rocky and he's so in the zone
that he doesn't even know that behind
the glass is the man after whom he has
named his only child.
What proceeds
is truly
This is not one of the great Spikeley
movies, but this is one of the great
Spikeley sequences in a movie. One of
the great Spikeley passages in a Spikely
movie. it. This one is is up there
because basically
ASAP Rocky is laying down a track
and Dazelle is like he announces himself
by pressing the button and now he is
audible in the studio and he's like you
know what you can make this song better.
You might want to consider
>> just doing a little ad living. Mhm.
>> And like layering just layering the
vocal a little bit.
>> It sounds kind of like um
an argument in favor of more musicality.
>> Yeah.
>> Which is such a black boomer request of
rap.
>> Yep.
>> Where's the melody?
>> What's the tune, brother?
>> Yeah.
>> ASAP Rocky is like, "What the what?" I
mean, and so now ASAP Rocky knows that
that the person whose son he tried to
steal and, you know, got this $17.5
million in Swiss Swiss Franks from
>> Mhm.
>> Uh, is now sitting in the studio,
his making his dream come true. This is
the thing he wanted to happen.
>> This is it
>> 10 years ago.
>> Yeah.
>> But it never did.
But now,
>> and all he had to do was mistakenly
kidnap somebody else's son. And here we
are.
>> But the great thing about this scene is
the Denzel Washington character is
actually trying to produce this record.
How Denzel and and and ASAP communicate
to each other is basically in verse.
>> Yes. They are rapping to each other both
about what needs to happen for this song
to be better
>> but also for what led us to this point.
>> Right.
>> Right. Like how I got to be on one side
of the glass and you got to be on the
other side of the glass
>> which Okay. So now let's talk again
about this whatever quality we're
talking about which is like this
extraness.
>> Mhm.
>> This is happening. It's on the one hand
the corniest thing that's ever happened
>> in the history of cinema. Right. I don't
know. Show me where my money at.
>> He's like interpolating Nas at some
point.
>> It's incredible. But it also reminded me
and now go back to the Dark Knight of
the Soul.
>> Mhm.
>> In the office. The scene in the office
with him pleading to Stevie and Aretha
and Jimmy to to help.
>> And think of that as saliloquy. And go
back. This is like I'm like, "Oh, wait.
>> Is Spike doing Shakespeare?"
>> Yes, 100%.
>> All of a sudden, it's rhyming couplets.
It's collaborative language, but also a
confrontation. And again, it's an
outward, it's a sort of outward
splattering of emotional states that can
only be um finally consummated by a
clash.
>> Yes.
>> And it's like this is the this is high
classicism at the same time as it's
really
>> class clashing.
>> That's right. Yeah.
>> Right. But this goes on for like five
minutes. Every time you think you you're
like uncomfortable with the scene and
you're like, "They're gonna cut. We're
gonna cut to the police, please."
They're like, "No, no, no. I got 16 more
bars for you."
>> But I I really love this sequence
because you are right. It is It is the
It is the What is the line from Oh, what
a beautiful day that opens the movie.
It's like the corn is piled as high in
the meadow.
>> Yeah. like the corn is the corn is like
flooding this studio right now, but it
also is
really getting it at what the the sort
of moral tensions are here between
who made it and who didn't make it. The
point here is that the kidnapping
happens to make a point to David King
that he had a chance to sign this kid.
You could have listened to that playlist
months ago.
>> Yeah, he could have listened to that and
signed him. This would never have
happened. But instead, here we are. I
feel like this opens the movie up into
this really new strange territory
>> where a black tastem gatekeeper
>> and a young upstart who in the world of
the movie feels he deserves more than
he's been given. Mhm.
>> And I'm curious what you think
is happening here in this in this
exchange.
>> Well, it's it's so interesting in both
directions. Think about it from the
charact from the perspective of a young
felon as
>> did we even mention that his name is
Young.
>> I'm so sorry. Also, his name has to be
Young Felon.
>> It can only be Yu N G F E L O N. That's
right. I mean this is what are we doing?
>> Unreal.
>> It has to be young felon in the world of
this movie.
>> The fact that he obsesses over, right,
and lionizes this figure before he
becomes sort of alienated against him
and has to, you know, he he gets
radicalized and has to do this
kidnapping. He's following a pattern
that we see all the time. Part of the
structure of hip-hop has been,
especially in it, into its maturity as
you go into like the late 90s into the
2000s, young kids without much social
capital or actual capital looking at and
rooting on the mostly financial exploits
of people who they still identify with.
>> Jay-Z's from where I'm from, but he's
also
>> now,
>> you name it, now he's a billionaire. We
mentioned Puffy. same trajectory
that the class ascension, the
acquisition of capital is almost as much
the like locus of fanhood as the music
itself.
>> Mhm.
>> Mhm. And so that's really interesting
that somebody's finally had enough of
that. That young felon's like, "No, I I
watched you and I looked up to you and I
hoped I could be like you,
>> but something about that cracked."
>> Mhm.
>> On a some level, it's like it's got it's
got shades of Luigi Menjon. It's like um
all of a sudden the world is not working
for me and I'm pissed off about it and
I'm going to
>> burst through the veneer. I'm going to
burst through the sort of fellow feeling
I'm supposed to have with you and
illustrate our differences.
>> Well, I think that this is about
how you didn't pull me up with you.
>> And I'm assuming if if the a if Young
Felon is such a fan of David King, he
can see what this label's priorities
are, like he can see that like it might
be forsaking him. You know, the studio
confrontation between between David King
and Young Felon is just the first one.
>> Yes.
>> Then he cops a plea, gets a 25-year
sentence,
and between the sentencing and
one of the final two scenes of the
movie, Spike Lee gives us ASAP Rocky
doing trunks in a music video.
>> There's some young ladies shaking their
asses be behind him. twerk twerkathon
happening all around him and split
screen
is David King taking this in this is
like a this is a fever dream in the
world of the movie this is Denzel
Washington granting young felon's
request to come see him in prison come
see about me he does it but before we
get this confrontation we get this music
video and the split screen is meant to
then mirror what happens once they get,
you know, to the actual prison and Young
Felon is on one side of the glass and
David King's on the other side. But in
in this in the world of this of this
musical interlude,
what you see is Denzo Washington on the
right side of the frame.
>> Mhm.
>> Making
just like I mean Vincent, you will have
to like
hold your tummy when I say it, but he's
making Cliff Huxable faces, right? He is
making faces to me that are
>> really Cosby-esque.
I hadn't thought about it like that, but
>> I mean he is like,
you know,
>> like what is this? Isn't jazz
>> and we have already heard Denzel say
that 25 years not enough time. He should
be serving more.
>> That's right. And I just
there is something about the choice
that's being made here that feels both
very this is the most conservative
situation Spike Lee has put himself in
>> a movie, right? This feels like an
argument for something. And I'm really
curious what you think about the way
generational ideas function in Spike
League. Older people and younger people.
It's mostly men talking about older
black men and young black men. I think
that
>> this has been going on undercover in a
lot of his movies. His movies have
really been about mentorship
>> and toutelage. What a young black man
can learn from an older older black man.
>> Classically mookie and a mayor and do
the right thing.
>> Yeah. Doctor,
>> come on. What? What?
>> Always do the right thing.
>> That's it.
>> I got it. I'm gone.
>> In the Five Bloods, there's um Delroy
Lindo and and I I believe his son in
that movie.
>> Yep. Yep.
>> So, you're just a little
>> J ass gangster now, huh?
>> After everything you put me through, I'd
say you get a basement bargain.
You know, I'm grateful.
>> Get on the bus is exclusively
about generational tension.
>> Let that be a lesson to you, young
blood. Work hard, graduate from school.
white man can't hold you down. I don't
care what anybody say. You get your
education,
>> right?
>> And what it means for these older guys
to be going to the Million Man March
along with these these the old heads and
the kids in those films. There really is
there's both sides, right? There are two
sides in this fight.
>> But one thing that is not present in
that education system is
prison, right? Mhm.
>> That lesson is not happening between a
free man and and a convicted felon who
goes by young felon. Yeah.
>> Uh his nom rap is is young felon. And I
>> has anybody ever said nom rap before? I
hope I hope that that's a coin edge. And
I'm glad it's it was you.
>> Let's go with it.
>> Yeah.
>> I did not feel good about that. I don't
know. What are you What are you
thinking? Well, one of the real world
corollaries is that this year ASAP Rocky
who on the one hand is with a
billionaire. Talk about spanning
experience. And on the other hand, he
had a trial for a for a sort of felony
assault, gun charge, whatever it was
that was based on a guy that he knew
that was a friend from his sort of ASAP
mob days and they their relationship
fell apart and there was a confrontation
and ASAP Rocky was totally exonerated.
He's not guilty. But a another real
world correlary is someone who shows the
sort of permeability,
>> the kind of the the quick departures
that happen in within the sort of black
class society that these things,
especially if you're coming from a
certain place, are never quite as far
away from one another as one might
think. So that was certainly part of the
sort of biographical underpinning that I
was thinking about. there is like a
an observation that is um based largely
not in statistics but in representations
let's say right um there are any number
of
>> young drill rappers Bobby Schmurda a
rapper from uh Brooklyn New York just
got back home there's a there's a
pattern a quickening pattern of these
young entertainers bringing street stuff
into their music and getting caught
based on their lyrics and going through.
So there is so whatever this is a
spectacle. This is more a mirage than a
a statement of of what is the state of
black America. But it is still there and
someone like Spike Lee whose job has
been to manufacture representations of
black life therefore has to reckon with
it. What is this image and is it one
that I'm comfortable with? But this to
me is connected to this to the way I
think he has been perceiving
a class of young black men
>> as problems to be lectured to put away.
>> It's rare that he even has these people
in his movies. And it's so it's telling
to me that they've shown up here and
there is real
class envy. Mhm.
>> There is a real sense of neglect
operating here that the movie isn't
exploring, but it's immediately
pathizing and punishing.
>> And I don't know, it just kind of bums
me out.
>> Yeah. I'm less bummed out by it. I while
agreeing with your analysis of it and
what it sort of all
quoteunquote means, it's weird because
on the one hand there is a sort of you
mentioned Cosby and there is a sort of
pound cake speech texture.
>> You said it before I did. I was
wondering if you were going to take the
bait, but you took it.
>> Oh, I mean
>> so let's keep fishing. Yeah, that there
is like a
>> we should say that the speech is
essentially I will boil it all the way
down to boys pull up your pants.
>> People getting shot in the back of the
head over a piece of pound cake and then
we all run out and we're outraged. Oh,
the cop shouldn't have shot him. The
hell was he doing with the pound cake in
his hand?
>> Yes. It's um I think the classic
expression of sort of the negative side
of what we call respectability politics.
I do admire
Spike for using the tools that he has to
explore this uncomfortable tension even
if even if it includes an unavoidable
misdiagnosis for somebody who's been
famous and wealthy for as long as many
of us can remember. Right. Um
>> you mean Spike? Well, I'm talking about
Spike, but also again
>> for me in this movie, Spike very much is
David King, right? Somebody who
>> announces often his his closeness to to
the mass of black people, but is also
materially separate and has to deal with
that.
>> Yes. I mean, the the tough thing here is
this guy did kidnap somebody and and
insist on a bunch of money, but I think
there's like the relish that the Denzel
Washington character feels, right? It
isn't
it isn't like, hey,
I I want to help you.
>> I want to nurture you. I'm I'm really
not happy about what happened. But
listen, waiting for you on the other
side of this sentence
>> when you were 60 years old.
>> Yeah.
>> Is a record contract.
>> We got you, man.
>> This is not the choice that he makes.
>> He's the one who pulls the the bodega
gate, so to speak, down on ASAP Rocky.
And we get a last sequence of this
movie, which might be just one of the
worst endings to a Spikeley movie. I
don't know if it's ever, cuz you know,
the man the man likes to
do something crazy at the end of all his
movies.
>> This one,
the wife,
the not kidnapped son, and David King,
>> they're back high up. They're back up in
the sky.
>> They're on top. It's another beautiful
morning.
>> And they have invited a guest, special
guest,
because earlier in the movie, we heard
Trey say to David, "Yo, Dad,
>> got to listen to this music.
>> Got to listen to this music.
>> I'm I'm like I'm with this girl. She is
tight."
>> Yeah.
>> And she sounds so good.
And so, last sequence of the movie,
>> this light-skinned woman
>> is standing at a piano
singing a song, an audition
for for Trey's Daddy.
>> And the song she sings, we find out, is
called Highest to Lowest. This is like
if Amy Winehouse couldn't find the
directions to Alicia Keys's house.
That is what is happening with this
song. It is one of the
>> It's just so bad.
>> It's not the best song, but boy is she
singing though.
>> She's really giving it to him. But did
you feel anything?
>> And then I didn't feel much. But but I
will say that David King is feeling
something and he's again making his
>> he's Cosbying out
>> faces of pleasure and he's like about to
cry and it's like and if he's asking
young felon for more melody man there's
so it's like now that's music.
>> You know what I mean? It's like now
that's music.
>> That's the thing that really made me sad
>> because a choice had been made. He was
given an offer right now. Okay. Again,
this is a felon called young felon
making this offer, but it is also saying
something about
where this movie anyway thinks music
ought to be going. I think it actually
like awakened me to think about like
what is going on in the arc of
Spikeley's career,
>> right? We are watching something that
we've never seen before
in that, you know, Spikeley's been
making movies since 1986. It's been
almost 40 years.
>> Mhm.
>> We've never had a black filmmaker
get old on us like this. Like a popular
black filmmaker, right? I mean,
>> have a full arc in the
>> Have a full arc
>> that like rhymes in some ways or
corresponds with evolutions that other
directors, we've gotten to see other
directors,
>> age, change,
>> you know,
reconsider themselves in some way.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And you really you really
really get a chance with this movie as
you mentioned get a chance to reflect on
some of those older films. The one I
thought I started thinking about was
what is perhaps my favorite specly movie
bamboozled.
>> Ah okay. Yes.
>> Which is all about representations and
you know accidentally
stumbling into success with what is a
minstrel show. Spikeley is still
deciding what he wants to see.
>> You know
>> that's a great way to put it Vincent.
>> And even
>> that's a great way to put it. And if he
if he wants to see the girl belting and
doing riffs in an old school kind of way
back up in the sky, like
>> what I appreciate about this film is
that it's generous for him to let us
know that that is what he wants to see.
>> And I mean that
>> I receive it by Yes. Yes.
>> He's like, you know, I've thought about
this. I'm giving this role to ASAP
Rocky. I respect this man and I feel
ambivalent about the world that he
represents comes from and I know that
there is
a conflict not just a class conflict but
a conflict of of of taste and
sensibilities that is happening within
me and I want to resolve it and this
film is I think indicative and
illustrative of that struggle and so
>> I'm I'm glad to know that he wants to be
next to the Tony Morrison painting with
the girl over in the living room belting
and sounding like something that we've
maybe heard before, but that ecstasy of
facial gesture that we get with from
David feels to me like Spike Lee
listening to black art,
>> you know, he's he wants that feeling,
>> but I I wish the song gave me that
feeling.
>> Yes.
>> And I feel like Spike Lee I mean, what
is he late 60s at this point?
>> I guess so. This is a guy who in my
absolute favorite Spike Lee movie, Spike
Lee is someone who chose not to send a
black man to prison.
>> Like this is the end of Clockers. One of
the greatest endings he ever came up
with.
>> Just thinking about it might make me
cry.
[Music]
>> It's Mai Feifer just on a train.
>> Yeah. Yes. Yes. He has been rescued from
almost certain
sentencing imprisonment for for murder.
>> Yeah.
>> And there's just a shot that we had
never seen before of a black man just
looking at open space. He's on one side
of the glass and there and on the other
side is not a lecture or punishment but
like like
>> vast freedom
>> and here we are 30 years later
>> and on the other side of
>> and we're seeing something new
>> from Spike Lee
>> which is you know prison. But I guess I
didn't read
I didn't read prison totally punitively
although of course it was and is
>> but I did think of it as
a representation
>> like even Puff Daddy himself is in jail
like that that jail is part of the like
it it has become so much a part of the
black imaginary or whatever that we do
have to see it and his name does have to
be young felon and again the Jeffrey
Wright character who has been in it and
has found you know 5% Islam there and
and it has like sort of become part of
his um I don't know moral becoming and
this kid who even when he's in jail the
ASAP Rocky character is like this is
good for us let's make a song
>> right
>> so Spikeley is like looking at what jail
what jail is in the imaginary and is
trying to sort
question that too. So it's like yeah it
is this like agent of punishment and jud
and judgment and you can't see the movie
without seeing that but it's also him
saying okay yeah I have freed I have
offered manum mission to other people in
my movies but what does it mean for
somebody to like what how do I deal with
that and so I think it matters therefore
that even the the public is on the side
of this guy who's now going to jail it's
like what does this mean can I
accommodate it
>> I Guess I would feel better about that
if it didn't feel like David King
himself was enjoying
>> Oh, yeah. The big payback.
>> Right. Exactly. Exactly. I That part
doesn't really That part I don't like.
>> Yeah.
>> Um that's the queasy part to me. I don't
know. I mean, I feel like this movie
worked for you.
>> Um
>> I can't wait to see it again. Do you not
yearn to see this movie again?
>> I I will definitely watch it again.
>> Yeah,
>> I'd watch it again because I think that
this movie is about something
>> Mhm.
>> that is greater than the text, right?
>> Yeah,
>> Vincent, thanks for doing this.
>> It's the best. I could do it forever.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you for having me. It's just such
a thrill.
>> What a I mean, back at you, sir.
>> This is the best.
[Music]